Pushkin.
Hello. Hello. Malcolm here. Before we
get to the episode, I want to let you
know you can get this entire season now
adree by subscribing to Revisionist
History on Pushkin Plus. Sign up on the
show page on Apple Podcasts or at
pushkin.fm/plus.
Pushkin Plus subscribers can access ad
free episodes, full audio books,
exclusive binges, and bonus content for
all Pushkin shows.
>> Previously on Revisionist History.
>> Was he Was he a good preacher?
>> Evidently, he must have been uh
>> charismatic.
>> Yes, I would say
>> very charismatic.
>> Florence, you don't get here by
accident. And so the idea that someone
within this framework
could do something like Charles Sinnate
did was very disruptive.
He worked very hard to make sure nobody
knew outside that tight circle of
biological family.
When someone says, "I'm a member of the
Church of Christ," that means that they
are members of the true church.
Um, that's not a denomination, that's
not Protestant, it's not Catholic, it's
just the true church.
[Music]
[Applause]
We're now into the hills.
We're now into the Alabama Hills of um
we're in a we're in a we're on a long
winding two-lane road following an F-150
pickup truck like much of
um this corner of Alabama. It's it's
really gorgeous countryside.
[Music]
We are way out in I mean we haven't
passed a
a house in quite some time.
On one of our trips to the Scholes, my
colleague Benad Hafrey and I drove out
to find the house where Charles and
Elizabeth Senate lived. We didn't have a
precise address, just the name of their
road, which turned out to be a long
winding gravel track that runs high
along a mountain ridge. Kundog Cemetery
Road. Then arrive at your destination
>> where all all the best [__] dogs
>> arrived.
>> Find their final resting resting place.
>> Oh my god. It's an actual
>> It's a real
>> Because we couldn't find the Senate
House, we ended up at the cemetery.
There were headstones, lots of American
flags. There's a little sign with a [__]
dog on it. Only cemetery of his kind in
the world. Troop. First dog laid to rest
here. September 4th, 1937.
Then we met an older couple who gave us
directions. We drove back the way we
came and finally found it
>> here. This is the driveway and there's
the gate.
>> Okay, there's the
>> drain pipe.
>> The drain pipe.
I think I see the remains. So, it's just
an overgrown gate with some posted
signs.
The house is gone now. It was a It's a
double wide trailer burned down a couple
years couple years ago. There's a pond
back there. It's uh if we hadn't have
met that
that guy, we would have had no idea.
>> Yeah. You would not have identified this
as a I guess there's the only thing is
the gate that says private property.
>> It's all overgrown. Now,
if you wanted to hide,
let's just say this is a very good place
to hide.
Nobody's going to trouble you.
[Music]
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. This is the
Alabama murders.
[Music]
I talked in the last episode about the
notion of the failure cascade, a crisis
that does not resolve itself, but rather
accelerates in a way that we neither
anticipate nor desire. In this episode,
we're going to go deep into the crime
that took place on the morning of March
18th, 1988 that kicked off the cascade
and tore the Senate family apart before
it accelerated and spread to countless
others.
>> 35 years.
That's how long Elizabeth's family
waited for justice to occur.
35 long years. This is the attorney
general of Alabama, Steve Marshall, at a
press conference in 2022 when, by the
way, the Senate case still wasn't over
when it still had one final grotesque
act to come. To give some perspective,
almost half of Alabama's population
wasn't even born when this malicious
crime was committed. Well-known axiom is
true. The justice delayed
is justice denied.
>> No. What the Senate case teaches us is
that justice delayed is what justice is
in the world we have chosen for
ourselves.
The question is why? How does a crime
turn into a cascade?
[Music]
Episode two. Kundog Cemetery Road.
So then have you seen pictures of this
family of Charles Sinnate and Liz?
>> So actually Charles Sinnate kind of
looked like
a 1980s
TV evangelist.
>> This is Lacy Kennamer whose husband was
one of the many lawyers drawn into the
Senate case. He was handsome,
darkheaded,
kind of had that
southern a little bit a little bit
redneck. But look, she was homely as a
mud fence. I mean, and and everything
that I've read about him and what I
>> What was that phrase? Homely as a
>> mud fence.
>> I've never heard that fence.
>> Homely as a mud fence. Yeah.
>> I've never heard of I don't even heard
of a mud fence.
what you can imagine.
>> Yes, I it's painted a picture.
>> So, what I remember what I recall about
this
was
the fact that he was having an affair
with a parishioner.
There weren't 70 people that went to
that church. How did they not know that
this was going on? And then they lived.
They lived out on what's called Kung Dog
Cemetery Road, which
is in rural part of Calbert County. And
when I say rural, it it's frighteningly
rural. Um,
which makes me wonder about this guy. I
mean, it had to be Kundal Cemetery Road.
if you were on out on it.
He had to live 32 miles from his church
building
and a long way from his parishioners.
I think the guy was crazy.
On March 18th, 1988, just before noon,
Charles Sennet returned home from a
morning in town. His house was
ransacked. The living room was a mess. A
coffee table had been turned upside
down, its legs broken, wood fragments
were everywhere. A stereo and VCR were
missing. And lying on the floor of the
den in a pool of blood was his wife,
Elizabeth Dorene Senate. She'd been
stabbed repeatedly. A white and blue
afghan covered her face and torso.
Senate called the Colberg County
Sheriff's Office. An investigator named
Ronnie May answered the phone. said it
was hysterical and May couldn't
understand him at first. Didn't even
know whether he was speaking to a man or
a woman. May said, "Calm down." Then
again, calm down. Senate said, "I've
just come home. My house has been broken
into and my wife has been killed." May
said, "Stay where you are. We'll be
right there."
May and his officers drove out to
Senate's house. It was raining heavily.
As he walked in to the carport, Senate
came running towards him, wrapped his
arms around him, and said, "Ronnie,
Ronnie, they've killed her. They've
killed her." Ronnie May walked into the
den where Elizabeth Senna's body was
lying. He reached for a pulse. Couldn't
find one. Thought she was dead.
But when the ambulance arrived a few
minutes later, one of the paramedics
found a faint pulse.
Chuck and Mike Senate, their two sons,
were 25 and 23 years old at the time.
>> Mom was just a homemaker, kind,
nurturing. We was there every day after
school, you know, growing up, you know,
we never missed a time with her and
daddy.
>> They later gave an interview to the
local news about that day.
>> Chuck got the news before I did.
>> Daddy called me at work.
>> Yeah. Chuck called me at work, said
something happened to mom at the farm.
Get out here quick.
>> Elizabeth Senate was taken by ambulance
to Helen Keller Hospital in Sheffield.
In the ER, the medical staff tried
frantically to keep her alive. The
doctors started cardiac resuscitation,
put in an IV, gave her fluid, put in a
breathing tube. They took Elizabeth
Senate to the operating room, opened her
chest, found no blood in her heart or
vascular system. In one last attempt to
save her life, they put a clamp across
her aorta on the chance that the fluid
would fill her heart chamber.
We sat there for a while and then they
invite you up to the second floor, which
is where they deliver the bad news.
Elizabeth Sennet was pronounced dead at
2:05 in the afternoon.
Lacy Kennamer knew one of the nurses who
was there at the hospital when Elizabeth
was brought in that day.
>> So, she's in the ER with the doctor
and the and and Miss Senate.
>> Mhm. And the doctor said, "Please go out
and tell her husband she is still
hanging on. She's still with us." She
said, "I walked out of that I will never
forget as long as I live. I walked out
of that um emergency department, walked
out of the emergency room and went to
him and told him and he was astounded."
He said, "That cannot be."
>> Wow.
It wasn't long before the speculation
began. I'm just really curious about
when the news broke about what had
happened to uh Elizabeth or Elizabeth
Dorene. Um what can you tell me about
what that was like?
>> I can tell you every minute of that one.
This is Charlie Bill who went to Charles
Sennants Church.
>> When we stopped by to visit at the
church the last time where he was
preaching on the way home to visit our
parents, he backhanded his child. I
don't know what the child had done. My
husband was furious
because he said, "You just don't do that
to a child across its face. You might
hit its ear and causes the hearing to be
gone." So, he was really mad about it.
So when we heard the news on the radio
one morning at breakfast, Charles
Senate's wife has been murdered, my
husband looked right straight at me and
he said, "He did it."
That's how convinced he was over that
slapping.
That the viciousness was there that he
could do something like that. I don't
know, but that's where we heard it first
was that sitting at the breakfast table.
Carl Rhoden, a member of Senate's
congregation, spoke to Senate on the
morning of the murder and drove him to
the hospital.
>> Picked him up at Highway 72 and uh 247.
He was in ambulance and they got out and
got in the car with me, I brought him on
to the hospital.
>> Yeah.
>> The only thing he ever said after, you
know, you look back, he said, "They
shouldn't have done her that way."
Didn't really mean nothing at the time.
Her funeral was the following Sunday at
the Westside Church of Christ, her
husband's church. Roden watched Senate
walk out of the service.
>> After the closing prayers and singing
and all that, family comes out first and
he has her picture up against his chest
with both hands hugging it and it was
just most fake thing I believe I ever
saw. And I told my wife I that's the
most funniest thing I've ever saw. You
know, he just it looked put on.
>> Rhden lives in a small white house right
down the street from the old westside
Church of Christ, now empty, but still
with the very Church of Christ message
on the sign outside. Time is precious.
Are you spending time with the God who
made you? As we were talking with Rhden,
he told us about a friend, someone who'd
worked the case when it first broke. You
say his name is is Mickey.
>> Ricky.
>> Ricky. Ricky Miller.
>> Ricky Miller. And he was one of the
deputies investigating the
>> Yeah.
>> the case. And And he's he's
>> one you really need to talk with.
>> And so Rhoden called Ricky up.
>> When did you say come? Today or
tomorrow?
>> I don't know. [__]
>> Right now. Where you want to stay?
>> Okay. Get it over with.
>> We'll be there in now. They're filming
and everything. Get your hair combed.
>> What?
>> It's going to be a movie. They get your
hair combed. You got a haircut today?
>> No moving me in it.
>> Well, you done got your haircut.
>> Hell no. But hell no. I ain't no movie.
>> No, they just writing a story or
something. I don't really know.
>> Yeah,
>> they pretty good old Joe's anyway. They
are Yankees.
>> Hey, how many of them is it?
>> It's just two of them with a microphone.
>> Well, don't bring your death in there
soon.
>> Okay.
>> Be there in 10 minutes.
>> They'll be there in 10 minutes.
>> Okay. Bye.
>> Bye. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you. Appreciate it.
>> Yeah. Good luck.
[Music]
Carl Rhoden's friend Ricky Miller lives
in a small immaculate house in a quiet
part of Muscle Scholes. He's retired
after a long career as an investigator
in the district attorney's office.
handsome, quiet, recently widowed, still
had a law enforcement haircut.
>> I assisted uh the sheriff's department
in investigating the case,
and it got interesting.
>> You know, the more you got into it, the
more interesting it got.
>> He was part of the team that went out to
the Senate's property after the murder
to search the pond. They drained it,
found a survival knife, a fireplace
poker, and a fireplace brush.
There was so many leads and stuff we
followed and followed.
But at the time,
the Crimestoppers phone for our county
was in my office and I answered the call
and I got all the information on who
done it, who was all involved, and all
the particulars.
The anonymous caller named three young
men, all in their teens and early 20s.
Billy Gay Williams, John Forest Parker,
and Kenny Eugene Smith. The caller had
details right down to the location of
key pieces of evidence. The caller said
they had taken a VCR.
And the call I received even told me
where the VCR was being used, and it was
on Kenneth Smith's TV. Said, "It's
sitting there right now. He's using it."
And uh come to find out that was
accurate.
All three of the young men were
arrested. All three confessed.
Kenny Smith explained that he'd been
approached by Billy Williams a month
earlier. He knew Williams from high
school. The two of them had talked out
on his front porch. Smith said, quote,
"Billy said he knew someone that wanted
somebody hurt. Billy said the person
wanted to pay to have it done. Billy
said the person would pay $1,500 to do
the job. I think I told Billy I would
think about it and get back with him.
Smith then says he agrees to do it and
recruits John Parker to help. Two weeks
later, Smith met with the man Williams
had been in contact with. He didn't
identify himself and they had no idea
who he was. The man said he wanted
someone taken care of, a woman. The man
said the woman would be at home, that
she never had any visitors. The man said
that the house was out in the country.
They all met again at a coffee shop. The
man drew a diagram of the house. It was
supposed to look like a burglary that
went bad. The man said they could take
whatever they wanted.
On the morning of the 18th, Parker and
Smith met up at 8:30. Parker brought a
blackhandled survival knife. The two of
them drove out to Kundog Cemetery Road
in Parker's Pontiac Grand Prix. Smith
told investigators,
"John and I got to the Senate House
around 9:30, I think. I knocked on the
door. I told Mrs. Senate that her
husband had told us that we could come
down and look around the property to see
about hunting on it. John and I looked
around the property for a while, then
came back into the house. John and I
went back to the door. We told Mrs.
Senate we needed to use the bathroom and
she let us inside. I went to the
bathroom nearest the kitchen and then
John went to the bathroom. I stood at
the edge of the kitchen talking with
Mrs. Senate. Mrs. Senate was sitting at
a chair in the den. Then I heard John
coming through the house. John walked up
behind Mrs. Senate and started hitting
her. John was hitting her with his fist.
I started getting the VCR while John was
beating Mrs. Senate. John hit Mrs.
Senate with a large cane and anything
else he could get his hands on. John
went into a frenzy. Mrs. Senate was
yelling, "Just stop. We could have
anything we wanted." As John was beating
up Mrs. Senate, I messed up some things
in the house to make it look like a
burglary. The last place I saw Mrs.
Senate, she was lying near the fireplace
covered with some kind of blanket. I had
gone outside to look in the storage
buildings when I saw Jon run out to the
pond and throw some things in it." End
quote.
The next morning, the two of them read
the newspapers and learned that the
woman they had attacked was dead and
that her name was Elizabeth Senna.
[Music]
>> Did you at what point during in the
investigation did you come to suspect
that Charles Sennet might be involved?
The first thing that caught our
attention, the best I can remember, was
he made too many alibis. You know, if
you go about your casual day, you might
run into one, maybe two people, but he
had a pattern everywhere he went was to
make an alibi. And when he went by
Carl's house, Carlson said told me he
never been to his house except that one
time.
8 to 8:30 Joel Kendrick 8:30 to 9 Sam
Garrett Jr. 9:00 Billy Alexander 9:15
Mrs. as Louise Allen sees him leave
Westside Church 9:30 to 10 Carl Rhoden
10 Terresa Hall 10:15 a phone call with
Tammy Sue Wright 11:00 a.m. that Brenda
sprayed on Woodmont Drive in Tuscumbia
and on and on.
He made too many out of it was overkill,
you know. He stopped to see people they
had never seen and that just threw up a
red flag to us. Why is he seeing all
these people for the first time and
happened to be at the time his wife's
being murdered, you know, and even on
his way home, I don't know if you're
familiar where it happened at out in the
county. Have you ever been there?
>> Kud Cemetery Road.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's a good ways out there. People
along the way even on the highway 247 G.
They said he had stopped and said he'd
never stopped here before.
He could tell you every time,
everything, every day. Well, had my wife
just been murdered in my home. I
couldn't tell you nothing. My mind's
gone. But he knew everything in detail.
That's a red flag.
>> So, it's
And then Carl told us that in the car,
Carl takes him to the hospital
that night. He says said that Senate
said to him, "They beat her up pretty
bad or something like that.
>> They shouldn't have done it that way.
>> They shouldn't have done it that way."
>> How does he know there's two?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. When you use the word they
>> Yeah. Yeah.
I understand that when
uh Senate is
he tells the story about how he comes
back to the house, he sees his wife's
body
and then they say, "What did you do?"
And he said, "I didn't touch her." Even
though he was trained in and surely that
was another red flag. His wife was lying
mortally wounded a few feet away. He
didn't touch her. And this was a man who
was trained in CPR. That was a question
we all wondered. First thing you're
going to do is go to your wife. If it
had been my wife laying there,
blunging, bloody, and all, first thing I
would have done was checked her, grabbed
her, I would have had some kind of
evidence on me that I had made contact
with. He lived 16 miles out. It's going
to take them a while to get there. So,
what are you doing the whole time? Are
you just standing there looking at her?
then you're not going to check her.
That's a red flag.
You know, there would have been some
kind of evidence that you would have
checked your wife. He did not.
[Music]
In the brother's grim telling of Little
Red Riding Hood, a fairy tale beloved by
small children for centuries, Little Red
Riding Hood is tricked by a wolf dressed
as her grandmother and eaten. She's then
saved by a hunter who cuts open the
wolf's belly, glimpses her red cap, and
pulls her out. Ah, how frightened I have
been. how dark it was inside the wolf's.
Little Red Riding Hood, however, quickly
fetched great stones with which to fill
the wolf's belly, and when he awoke, he
wanted to run away, but the stones were
so heavy that he collapsed at once and
fell dead. Then another wolf stalks her,
jumps on the roof of her grandmother's
house, and Little Red Riding Hood and
her grandmother foil him by putting a
pot of sausage flavored water in front
of their house. Then the smell of the
sausages reached the wolf, and he
sniffed and peeped down, and at last
stretched out his neck so far that he
could no longer keep his footing, and
began to slip, and slipped down from the
roof straight into the great trough, and
was drowned. But Little Red Riding Hood
went joyously home, and no one ever did
anything to harm her again.
Why do children so cheerfully indulge in
a story that is about, let's be clear, a
pedophile?
Because the wolf gets his comeuppance in
the end. It's the same principle that
explains everything from Sherlock Holmes
to the television show Law and Order to
countless tabloidy true crime podcasts.
We are more than happy to wallow in
stories of madness and depravity so long
as order is restored in the end.
Crime stories are exercises in moral
assurance.
With a Senate case, it's enormously
tempting to tell a story this way. The
case is pure southern gothic. I mean, a
preacher who has lost his way, a house
on a lonely mountain road called, for
goodness sake, [__] Dog Cemetery Road,
and then two local killers for hire
speeding back to Florence with a VCR in
the back seat. You want that version?
You can find it online.
This is the story of a God-fearing
family who preach, sing, and pray
together through good times and bad. But
behind church doors and wholesome music
blooms betrayal and deceit and a murder
that will rock a small town Alabama
community to its core.
[Music]
But let's be clear, the Little Red
Riding Hood model is an illusion. You
don't return home happily and safely
after fighting off a violent predator.
You spend the rest of your childhood
recovering. The actual NYPD is nowhere
near as effortlessly effective as the
fictional NYPD of Law and Order. And as
much as everyone involved in the Senate
case wanted it to end neatly and tidily
as all the classic crime stories do, it
didn't end. It kept going.
So, tell me about when this when the
Senate case breaks
uh when we first hear about it, what
impact does it have on the town?
>> Well, of course, abject horror uh
throughout the whole community. And it
of course made the gory headlines for
days and days, especially because they
didn't know who had murdered the the
minister's wife. And and as long as
they're on the run, then then
everybody's frightened. They don't know
the motive.
>> Billy Warren, the Florence Town
historian.
>> Uh they don't know at that point that
the minister has hired these young men.
They don't know anything. So it it was
gripping really for the whole community
because there was so much unknown.
In the middle of this is Senate himself
under suspicion but still at large
trying and failing to play the role of
the grieving husband and becoming
increasingly aware that his treachery
was transparent.
Why did Charles Sennet do such a bad job
of covering his own tracks? Billy Gay
Williams, the man he first approached
with his scheme, was his tenant for
goodness sake. The sheriff's deputy,
Ronnie May, recognized Senate because
there had been a murder not long before
at a gas station, and Senate had come to
the crime scene uninvited and hung
around as if he was studying police
procedure. And you know where he found
the money to pay his hitman? His lover.
It's as if he wasn't even trying, like
he turned himself in before he'd even
committed his crime.
When I try to imagine what was going
through his mind in the days after his
wife's death, I can't help but think of
what the theologian Lee Camp said in the
last episode about how Senate's original
transgression, his affair with a woman
in his church, would have filled him
with shame.
And remember the joke he told that for
us in the Church of Christ, it's easier
to get forgiveness for murdering someone
than it was for a divorce.
The point of the joke is that we are the
most rigorous of Christian communities
and we will cast you out for a
secondderee transgression like cheating
on your wife as surely as for a
firstderee transgression like arranging
for her murder. The acts are very
different but the consequences are the
same. So why would Charles Sennet act as
if he was indifferent to whether he got
caught? Because maybe in his own tangled
mind, the leap from an affair to a
killing wasn't a leap at all. From the
moment he cheated on his wife, he was
already beyond redemption.
Charles Senna was called in for
questioning. He admitted to the affair,
but he denied any involvement with his
wife's death. He said he suspected a
black man from Cherokee, Alabama, a town
not far from his house, who he said had
an ongoing feud with his son. The police
called Senate back for another round of
questioning. One of the officers
mentioned the name Kenny Smith and
Senate turned beat red.
Senate left the police station. He drove
to his son Michael's house.
>> You know, he he said, you know, I failed
a lie detector test. He said, you know,
I've been involved
with somebody else
and uh
we're we're taking all this in. Can't
believe it.
>> Charles Senate left the house, got in
his Chevy truck, picked up a 22.
>> Pow. You hear it?
>> Firecracker.
>> He's in his truck
where he shot itself.
That was
7 days after mom
>> mom got killed
>> Friday to Friday.
>> Yeah. Lost them both in seven days.
Yeah.
One don't know how much you can take
until you go through something like
that.
>> In the neat and tidy version of the
Senate story, this is the ending. The
killers have confessed and are in
custody. The master criminal has shot
himself. The victim is buried. A crime,
a culprit, a mystery, a resolution, a
beginning, an end,
[Music]
but we're not telling that version of
the story.
We're just getting started.
Coming up on the Alabama murders, the
trial of John Forest Parker. I just
don't think some of these people that
were on the jury, they didn't want that
to be on their conscience the rest of
their life, putting somebody into the
death penalty.
I've had, you know, other cases that
technically were probably factually more
complex, but this is Yeah, this is the
one that I will
is still on my mind even without job.
He was a chief of police in Florence. He
theorized really early on that, you
know, that that it wasn't like it was
like it was supposed to be looking like
it was
revisionist produced by Lucy Sullivan,
Ben Nadaf Hafrey, and Nina Bird
Lawrence. Additional reporting by Ben
Denafhrey and Lee Hedgepath. Our editor
is Karen Shukerji. Factchecking by Kate
Furby. Our executive producers, Jacob
Smith. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Production support from Luke
Lamond. Original scoring by Luis Gera
with Paul Brainard and Jimmy Ba. Sound
design and additional music by Jake
Gorski.
I'm Malcolm Glavo.